# project1
Authors: Hussain Gardezi, Andy Jobe, Christian Ramos, Jeff Gielniak
Date: 2024-01-23

Original data download page: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/kamilpytlak/personal-key-indicators-of-heart-disease
Original data repo:https://github.com/kamilpytlak/data-science-projects/blob/main/heart-disease-prediction/2022/notebooks/data_processing.ipynb

Our dataset is collected from a large study performed by the CDC yearly where they interview over 400,000 individuals over the phone asking about their general well being, health issues, drug and alcohal use and physical statistics.  
We will use this data to attempt to answer the following questions:
1. Is there a correlation between 'Taking Mental Health Days' and 'General Health Overall'?
Answer: My analysis found that on average, from ~89k individuals, the worse ones health gets, the more mental health days you can expect them to take. Individuals with excellent health took just over 2 mental health days while those with poor health took over 13. With an R value of .95 this suggest a very high correlation between the two variables.
I wanted to ensure that the dataset was not skewed in one direction or the other. If we had very little data for any health group, but especially the top and bottom groups, then it would be a concern and the result would need further validation. I found that there was sufficient representation from all groups although most of the sample was on the healthier side. This could be explained by the source of the data as certain states and cities are healthier. I wanted to validate my initial findings by looking at the percent of total mental health days taken by group. The results supported the initial findings. The excellent and very good health make up over 50% of the sample group, but make up ~32% of the mental health days taken. Conversely individuals with poor and fair health make up ~17% of the sample group, but make up ~36% of the mental health days taken. One surprising observation is that the Good health group had almost the same percent between the two charts. I’m not positive what this suggests.
The last thing I did was look at the same problem through a different lens. Categorizing health into five different buckets is likely over simplifying a very complex measurement. Also, the buckets being used could be qualitative measurements instead of being based on hard data. For that reason I wanted to do the same analysis but use a different way of categorizing “health”. I used BMI this time which still has flaws but is quantitative. The results were far less conclusive. With an R value of .08 there was a correlation but it’s very weak. This analysis also surfaced some potential shortfalls with the data. The obvious one is the large grouping of data on increments of 5 days. This suggests that people might be using mental health days not because they need them for mental health reasons but because they are given a certain amount of these days from their employer and use them as vacation days. This last analysis makes me less confident in my initial findings and suggests that there are other factors at play.
2. Are Ecigarettes better or worse for your health compared to regular smoking?
Answer: We used data on General Health along with if an individual used ECigerettes or smoked to draw our conclusions.  Comparing pie charts generated by the two datasets, the findings suggest that Among current smokers, e-cigarette users reported better perceptions of their health, with a lower percentage in the "Poor" health category (2.5%).  Also, Non-smokers using e-cigarettes demonstrated a more balanced health distribution but had a higher percentage of "Poor" and "Fair" health ratings. This may indicate that e-cigarettes are less harmful than regular smoking for current smokers. However, for non-smokers, e-cigarette use may introduce risks without clear health benefits. The data highlights several critical insights, including that E-cigarettes may be a less harmful alternative for current smokers looking to reduce harm or quit smoking. Also that Non-smokers using e-cigarettes do not report significantly better health outcomes andmay face risks that outweigh the benefits.
However, these observations are based on self-reported health perceptions and not medical assessments. Additional factors—such as pre-existing health conditions, age, lifestyle, and frequency of e-cigarette use—could influence the results. The data reflects how individuals feel about their health, not medical diagnoses or long-term outcomes. Additionally, further research is needed to assess the broader, long-term impacts of e-cigarette use.  These are the limitations of the dataset.  Ultimately, we can conclude that E-cigarettes may play a role in harm reduction for smokers, but their safety and efficacy for non-smokers remain questionable.
3. Is more sleep an indicator of better overall health? (chronic conditions BMI, conditions of good health?)
Answer: Based off the data, there is a clear correlation in hours slept per day and general health score.  More hours slept will provide a better health score.  According to a linear regression model with an R squared value of 0.97 (so, a very good fit to the data), an average of 0.13 hours (about 8 minutes) will increase your health score (1=Poor, 2=Fair, 3=Good, 4=Very Good, 5=Excellent) by one value.  There could be some underlying noise contributing to this.  It's possible that people with a worse health situation could have sleep apnea or health issues that cause them to get less sleep than a perfectly healthy person.  
Additionally, when looking at a population of people who average nine hours of sleep per day, vs a population of people who sleep 5 hours per day, a similiar trend is seen.  The nine hour population has 16.6% people who claim to be in Excellent health and only 4.1% that claim to be in poor health, while those numbers for the 5 hour population are 11.0% and 8.7% respectively.  
Thus it can be concluded that a great amount of sleep on average will correlate to better health overall. 
4. What are the healthiest and least healthiest states?
Answer: Based off of BMI, the five healthiest states are (from 5-1) Massachusetts, Vermont, California, Colorado, and Hawaii.  The average BMI of a Hawaiian person checks in at 26.84.  The five least healthiest states are (from 46-50) Alabama, Ohio, Kentucky, Mississippi, and West Virginia.  The average West Virginian has a BMI of 29.82.  Based off the percentage of the population that claims to do a physical activity daily, Colorado is the most healthy with 84.78% of the population, and Mississippi is the worst with 68.68% responding 'yes'.  Colorado and Vermont were in the top 5 of both results and Mississippi and West Viginia were in the bottom 5 in both results, drawing a pretty clear top 2 healthy states and bottom 2 unhealthy states.  
5. Is there a correlation between depressive disorders and BMI? (high or low)
Answer: We filtered the data to remove rows of incomplete data and columns of irrelevant data.  We then categorized the BMI values into disctint groups for analysis (e.g., underweight,normal, overweight, obese).  Histograms were then used to illustrate the BMI distribution for individuals witha nd without depressive disorders and a Chi-Square test was used to evaluate the relationship between BMI categories and depressive disorders.  The Chi-Square statistic and p-value determine the significance of the observed relationship.  
The analysis identifies significant patterns and relationships between BMI categories and the prevalence of depressive disorders.  Key insights are derived from statistical and visual evidence provided in the notebook.
